Okay. Welcome back to Gary's Economics.
Today we are going to explain why wages are falling.
Okay, so one of the biggest problems
with the economy in the last 20 years,
especially the last 5 years, is that wages are falling.
What do I mean when I say that?
If you look at the actual nominal level of wages,
basically they're stagnating.
But if you look at what
you can actually buy with your wage
in terms of recently, especially food, energy, housing,
especially compared to house prices, wages
have really collapsed in the last 20 years.
And I think most mainstream
economists have very little interest in
to say to explain why your wage has fallen
so much in the last 20 years.
They'll probably say things like,
productivity growth is not good,
productivity is stagnant.
And I think if you were to buy this argument,
it wouldn't really explain
why wages are aggressively falling.
Because productivity,
as much as it's not growing
aggressively in the last 20 years,
it still goes up every year.
And yet,
if you look at what an ordinary person
on an ordinary wage can buy,
they're getting less housing,
increasingly less ability to buy
food, energy, the real basics of living.
And especially if you look at their ability
to buy assets.
house prices, stock prices, wages are collapsing.
Now, this is something which...
it was actually one of the first things
I ever started thinking about that got me into
thinking about wealth inequality,
the importance of wealth inequality.
And the first thing I ever did
when I, after I quit
banking in 2014 was I made a website,
the website still up, it's called...
it was called wealtheconomics.org
but we've bought garyseconomics.org.
That website is still there.
So basically if you want to understand this theory
of how wealth inequality
affects wages and drives your wage down,
if you want it in words, it's all there on the website.
But we’re going to explain it to you now.
All right.
So the first thing you need to understand
is what is wealth inequality.
Because often when I talk about wealth inequality
people think I'm talking about income inequality.
This is not about your job. This is about what you own.
Before that you need to understand what is wealth.
So we've got a video in the channel called
What is Wealth that really delves into this.
It's one of the first videos we did.
So a lot of new people might not have seen it.
So if you want a really detailed
explanation of what wealth is,
go back and watch the What is Wealth video.
You can see me walking around the canals around here.
Basically, wealth is about ownership of assets.
So the most obvious example
for you, for most ordinary people would be
whether you own your own home or not.
If you don't own your home, who does own your home?
You need to account for your mortgage.
So it's who owns the property
after mortgages are accounted for. So if you own
a 500 grand property with a 400 grand mortgage,
you basically own only 20% of your own home.
But what I want you to understand
is wealth is not just housing.
So for most ordinary people,
owning the home you live in is very difficult.
most people are just trying
to pay off the mortgage on their home,
trying to own their own home.
But there's a ton of other wealth
that exists, which is mainly commercial property.
So if you walk down the high street,
you'll see shops, you'll see restaurants,
you'll see bars.
I'm talking to you from close to Canary Wharf,
enormous office buildings.
if you go into the centre of London, into Soho,
you'll see theatres and shopping centres
and all of these kinds of things.
Who owns the commercial property?
So residential property is still owned a lot
by ordinary families, but commercial property
is mainly owned
through companies,
through the stock market
and is overwhelmingly owned by richer people.
I should also add, outside
the cities, there's a ton of commercial wealth.
We still do have some factories in this country.
There's a ton of farmland.
There's a ton of productive equipment.
There's the windmills and the
power plants that generate your electricity.
All of this stuff is owned by somebody who owns it.
Now,
in this country,
there still is a relatively large property
owning middle class.
But in some other countries,
almost all of the wealth is owned by the very rich.
And if you were to go back
and look at what this country was like
100 years ago, 150 years ago,
very few people even owned the home that they live in.
So basically,
you can have a few different kinds of societies.
You can have a society
which has a large property owning middle class,
or you can have a very unequal society
where almost everything is owned by the rich.
I think the best way to understand
how wealth inequality affects wages
is to consider these two extremes.
So let's consider first
a wealth, a relatively wealth equal economy
where most people own a decent chunk of the wealth.
So what that looks like is
most people own their own home,
but on top of owning their own home,
they also own a big chunk of the stock market.
They don't have a lot of debt.
Maybe they don't even have any debt.
So what that means is you don't worry
about paying rent on the mortgage
because you own the home you live in.
And you also get this passive income
because you own the stock market.
Now let's consider a very wealth unequal economy.
This looks like basically nobody owns their own home.
Everything is owned by the very rich.
You might also have some debt
which is owned by the very rich.
So in this situation,
the vast majority of people, they own nothing.
They basically have to work to live.
If you can't get a job, then you can't live in a home.
You might not even be able to buy food for your family.
You very, very much need to work, to live.
If you don't work, then you're going to die, basically.
The flip side of that is that all of this wealth
is now owned by a very small group of families,
which means each individual family
will have extremely high levels of wealth.
The passive income still exists,
but rather than going to every family,
it's all going to Rishi Sunak’s family.
Basically,
this means that each one of these families
will have extremely high levels of passive income.
So Rishi Sunak,
if we believe the Sunday Times is worth £700 million,
he'll be making about £30-40 million pounds a year,
not much less than 1 million pounds a week
passive income.
So let's consider these two economies now. Right.
So in the first economy, the wealth equal economy.
There's not a huge amount of pressure on the family
because you own your home.
I own this property that I live in.
I don't need to buy mortgage. I need to pay rent.
It's great.
That makes life relatively relaxed.
I also have a stocks and shares portfolio,
which means I have a passive income.
Every family would be in this situation.
So what that means is
every family is relatively financially secure.
They don't have to work
that much.
When I say that, I don't mean that these guys
are just going to sort of laze around, but
it means that if they want to take time off work,
they can.
So, for example,
if you have kids, you know, when I was young,
my mum didn't work until I was 11 or 12.
And then she only worked a few years
because I've got a brother and a sister.
And she was raising the kids,
she was cooking the food, she was keeping the house.
And,
I think a lot of people would like to do this,
but they have a lot of pressure that they need to work.
They need to make money.
If you have a relatively wealth equal economy,
people can do this.
People can take time off
when they have kids or if they have
if they have
a family tragedy and they need to take time off
for mental health reasons
or if they have some creative project
they want to pursue to see if it works out.
They can take time off for this.
So in a relatively wealth
equal world,
people don't have to work
every hour God sends
because they have
a little bit of money to fall back on.
They don't need to pay the rent.
They have a bit of passive income.
So high levels of financial security,
low levels of pressure to work, extremely long hours.
People can take time out of work
at different periods in their life if they need to.
Now we look at the...
oh, one other thing about the wealth equal
economy is, it's not just you
that has this financial security, right?
Everyone around
you has this financial security as well,
and everyone around you also has passive
income to spend on top of their worked income.
So what you have then is a large number of people
financially secure.
Low levels of financial pressure
can take time off work if they need to,
and they have disposable income to spend.
That means if you do want a job,
there's a big customer base.
Now let's consider
the wealth unequal economy.
So in this situation,
70, 80, 90% of people own nothing.
They have no passive income. They don't own their home.
They need to work
and say 10%
or maybe even 5%,
or maybe even in extreme case, 1% of people
are phenomenally wealthy.
So here there's real desperation for work.
There'll be lots and lots of people trying to work.
But yet the extra problem that you have
is you have a small customer base
because there's only 1%
or 5% of people who are relatively rich,
only 1% or 5% of people who can spend.
So you have 90, 95% of people competing
for the spending of this small group.
Now, at this point,
it's important to understand that there is a difference
in the spending behaviours of ordinary people
and of wealthier people.
So most ordinary people,
they die leaving very little inheritance.
They spend almost all of the money
that they make during their lifetime.
What people tend to do
is they work during their life, they accumulate money.
They might even buy their own home,
but they spend that money in their retirement.
So by the time they have retired,
they’ve spent most of their income on
everything they bought during the course of their life.
And everything they saved up
goes on retirement, end of life care, things like this.
What that means is ordinary people spend the vast
majority of the money
they make over the course of their lives.
This is very different to the behaviour
of very rich people.
Now, if you are very rich,
I use them
all the time as an example, Rishi Sunak will make
close to £1 million of passive income every week.
When you make these kinds of enormous passive incomes,
it is basically impossible to spend
even a relatively small percentage
of your passive income.
That means that even if Rishi Sunak never worked,
and even if he spent £100,000 a week,
he would still be spending
a tiny percentage of his income
and his wealth would be growing very quickly.
The rest of his income is going on buying assets.
So what you can see here
is that there's a very different
behaviour towards income and assets
between ordinary people and rich people.
Ordinary people accumulate assets during their life
and then sell them back during their old age.
Rich people
spend a very small percentage of their income
and just accumulate more and more assets
over time.
So at this point,
you should probably be starting to understand
why is that wealth unequal economies
have very low wages.
In the equal economy,
lots of people financially secure,
not everybody needs to work,
they can take time out of work if they want to.
Lots of spenders,
very high economic demand
for goods and services and workers.
In the unequal economy.,
huge number of people
absolutely desperate
to work, need to work or they'll die.
Small number of people
who basically don't want to spend much money.
The last thing to add to this is in a modern,
developed high technology society.
A lot of what the rich people
own is very, very productive
machinery, very high productive,
what economists would call capital.
You know, we're talking a lot
nowadays about AI
and how this is going to make it much easier
to run a business with fewer employees.
What rich people have in a high tech economy
is enormous amounts of high
production, very productive
machinery equipment,
which means that they can get a lot of stuff produced
with a very small number of workers.
So what you have in
this unequal
economy is an economy with a huge amount of people
desperate to work for a tiny number of people
who spend a very low percentage of their income
and don't need any workers.
This is basically a recipe for disaster of low wages.
And I think if you look
both across the world we live in
now, but also across history,
you will see that anytime we have created an economy
that has extremely high levels of wealth inequality
almost all the time,
we have had very low wages as an outcome.
There are a couple of exceptions here,
which is perhaps
early USA, although it is becoming,
I think, lower wages for your average person,
sort of late industrial revolution in the UK.
And maybe I'll do a video at some point
explaining these examples.
But the general case
is most of history,
most of the world today,
including I would add, this country 100 years ago.
Very high levels of inequality
lead to very low levels of wages.
And when you have high levels of wealth
equality, better wealth distribution,
like we've had in, for example,
Europe in the 70 years after World War Two,
then you get high levels of wages.
Okay.
So that is a situation.
Good distribution of wealth, high wages,
bad distribution of wealth, low wages.
One thing I think obfuscates this, makes a little bit
harder to see is that especially in the last 20 years,
we have seen this increase in wealth inequality,
especially here in the UK,
but also in a lot of countries.
And we have also seen that decrease in wages.
It can become harder to see
because it's happened at the same time
as a broad devaluation of money.
Now, this is an important concept to understand
and if you want a full explanation of it,
we have a video on the channel
called Devaluation of Money.
You can go and watch that,
but I'll explain very quickly Now.
In the last
20 years, 25 years,
we've had a lot of inflation,
especially if you look at asset prices.
This to me is largely
because governments and central banks
have devalued, reduced the value of the currency.
They've done that by printing a lot of money.
They've done that by giving out a lot of money.
You can look at our early videos on Covid.
The government gave an enormous amount of money.
When the government gives that money,
it devalues money. And what you see is prices going up.
What this means is
we've got two things going on at the same time.
Number one, inequality is increasing.
When inequality is increasing, wages fall,
but also prices of goods and services fall
because there's very low
consumption power in the economy.
The flip side is the rich
have this enormous amount of passive
income that they're using to buy assets.
So an unequal economy wants assets,
it doesn't want wages.
So what you see when inequality is increasing is
asset prices rising quickly, all assets,
housing but also stocks, gold,
farmland, natural resources and wages falling.
But if you devalue the currency
what you can do is you can push all prices up.
If the value of money goes down,
what you see is all prices going up.
So in assets
these two forces push in the same direction.
Increased inequality means asset prices going up.
Devalued currency means asset prices going up.
So you see asset prices going to the moon.
And in the last 20, 30 years
we really have seen that in basically all assets.
But when we look at wages
these two forces are pushing in opposite directions.
Increased inequality is pushing wages down.
But a devaluation of the currency is pushing wages up,
which mean the two things balance out.
And that means that instead of seeing wages falling,
what you see is wages
kind of flatlining
while the prices of everything else
go through the roof,
such as house prices, stock prices,
food prices, energy prices, natural resource prices.
And this really changes the way
that ordinary people perceive what is happening.
So if you didn't have that devaluation of currency,
people would be able to see,
damn my wage is falling, why is my wage falling?
And we might be able to have a discussion about,
well this is happening because of rising inequality,
but because of currency devaluing.
People see their wages flatlining and asset prices
going through the roof.
This kind of disguises, a wage collapse
as a house price bubble,
and a lot of people perceive house prices
and stock prices going up as a sign of a good economy.
So because of this devaluation of currency,
what we have had is a collapse in wages,
which I think can be seen in fall of living standards
and in my opinion is caused by increased
inequality, kind of disguised
as a house price and stock market boom.
So disguising an economic depression in the sense
as a strong economy, as a booming economy.
Okay, so what's the conclusion?
If wealth inequality increases, your wages fall.
What you see is falling living standards,
but you might perceive it as inflation, prices
rising higher than your wages.
wealth inequality has increased
massively in the last five years.
That's why your wages have fallen.
That's why your living standards have fallen.
It's important to recognise
that once this happens, your wages fall
and asset prices go up.
Then that tilts the balance of power
even further away from you and towards the rich.
Because now these guys have assets
which are more valuable
and you have wages which are lower.
So there's a really dangerous cyclical
nature to this,
which means that once inequality gets bad,
wages fall and inequality gets worse.
This is what I'm really worried about.
This is why I started this channel.
This is what we're trying to stop.
There's another couple of aspects
to this rising inequality,
which I think are worth noting, which is, number one,
it changes the kinds of goods and services
that are demanded in an economy.
So when you have a broadly equal economy,
everyone is a consumer
and economies will tend to produce
things for ordinary people
because everyone has money in their pocket.
So you might produce sort of cars for regular people,
good quality clothing and houses for regular people.
But when the economy shifts
towards a very unequal economy,
you will start to see
the economy move into the production of luxury things
and basically very low quality
things for ordinary people.
So you will see that economy
start to focus on the sectors which serve
very wealthy people,
such as luxury sectors, such as financial services.
On top of that concentration of,
in specific sectors of the economy,
you'll also see
geographic concentration,
which we spoke about a few weeks ago
on the Shape of Great Britain video,
which is that since there’s
a large number of people desperate to work
and a very small number of customers,
people will be forced to move
geographically close
to the small number of rich people,
which is why you will see, in this country
we've seen a similar thing in a lot of countries.
poor people flooding out of the countryside,
flooding out of small cities into big cities.
That means big cities become increasingly very crowded.
That means rents become higher.
And this just makes the situation worse.
Basically, now you have low wages,
high rents, people
living in crowded, polluted big cities.
And basically it's a disaster. And this was
the economic dynamic, which I
recognised back in 2011, 2012,
which is
how I was able to recognise
that the economy would keep getting worse.
It was how I was able to make a lot of money
as a trader.
And it's still in place now. You know, I think it's...
if you get the time, it's worth going back and
looking at the website I put up in 2014, it’s
ten years ago
now saying that living standards would collapse, saying
that asset prices would go to the moon
because it was true then, and it's even truer now.
It's even truer now.
I think the key message that I want to get down here
is that wanting to reduce wealth inequality,
it's not about the politics of envy.
It's not even about fairness.
The reason I do this, the reason I campaign
to stop inequality from increasing,
is because I do not want
the ordinary people
of this country,
of other countries all over the world
to fall into desperate and abject poverty.
That is what is happening.
It is happening now in this country
and we get watched all over the world.
People send messages all the time. It's happening here.
It's happening here in America, it's happening
in Australia, it's happening here in Ireland.
It's happening all over Europe.
When wealth inequality is high,
wages and living standards are low,
wealth inequality is increasing very quickly.
Living standards are decreasing very quickly.
We are at present doing nothing to stop that.
And wealth inequality
will continue to increase very quickly,
which means your living standards
will continue to decrease very quickly.
If we do not deal with growing wealth inequality,
your kids and your grandkids lives will be desperately,
horribly poor.
I'm not just saying that. I'm betting on that.
I've been betting on it for 13 years now.
I made a lot of money doing it.
I don't want it to happen.
We can stop it.
The only way to stop it is to change the tax system.
We currently have a tax system
which charges you
an ordinary working people like you 30, 40, 50%
and charges billionaires nothing.
If we don't fix that, the problem gets worse.
Your life gets worse, your kids lives gets worse.
We need to deal with it.
And the only way to deal with it is to get together
and push back.
Educate your friends and your family
that the problem is wealth inequality
and the problem is getting worse.
The politicians themselves are very wealthy.
They're not going to fix it.
I want to make them take action. I need you to help me.
Support the channel, share the videos, understand
what's happening and push back. Thank you.